.TH GTKDIALOG3 1 "April 2026" "gtkdialog3 0.9.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gtkdialog3 \- create GTK3 dialog boxes from shell scripts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gtkdialog3
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gtkdialog3
is a utility for building GTK3 graphical user interfaces from shell scripts.
Users define the interface using an XML\-like markup language, which is parsed
and rendered as native GTK3 widgets at runtime.
The dialog description can be supplied via an environment variable, a file,
standard input, or an event\-driven program file.
Widget values are exported as shell environment variables when the dialog
closes, making it easy to capture user input in scripts.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug
Debug mode; prints the processed characters.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-program =\fIVARIABLE\fR
Get the GUI description from the named environment variable.
.TP
.BR \-g ", " \-\-glade\-xml =\fIFILENAME\fR
Get the GUI description from a Glade XML file.
Ignored if built without Glade library support.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-file =\fIFILENAME\fR
Get the GUI description from a regular file.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-include =\fIFILENAME\fR
Include (source) the given file before executing action commands.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-event\-driven =\fIFILENAME\fR
Execute the file as an event\-driven program.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-stdin
Get the GUI description from standard input.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-no\-warning
Suppress warning messages.
.TP
.BR \-G ", " \-\-geometry =\fI[XxY][+W+H]\fR
Set the placement and size of the window.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-center
Center the windows on the screen.
.TP
.B \-\-print\-ir
Print the internal representation of the parsed program and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-debug\-geometry
Print widget geometry negotiations to stderr.
For each widget, shows preferred width (min/natural), preferred height
(min/natural), and the final allocation as GTK assigns it.
Can also be enabled by setting the environment variable
.B GTKDIALOG_DEBUG_GEOMETRY
to any value.
.TP
.BR \-\-space\-expand =\fISTATE\fR
Set the default "expand" packing state for all widgets.
.TP
.BR \-\-space\-fill =\fISTATE\fR
Set the default "fill" packing state for all widgets.
.TP
.BR \-\-output\-format =\fIFORMAT\fR
Set the output format for widget values when the dialog closes.
.I FORMAT
is case\-insensitive and must be one of:
.BR bash " (default), " json ", or " xml .
With
.BR bash ,
output is a series of
.IB VAR =\(dq value \(dq
lines suitable for
.BR eval .
With
.BR json ,
output is a single JSON object.
With
.BR xml ,
output is an XML document.
.SH USAGE
.SS Environment variable (most common)
Store the dialog description in an exported environment variable and pass
its name with
.BR \-p :
.PP
.EX
#!/bin/bash
export MAIN_DIALOG='
<window>
  <vbox>
    <text><label>Hello, World!</label></text>
    <hbox>
      <button stock="ok"/>
      <button stock="cancel"/>
    </hbox>
  </vbox>
</window>'

gtkdialog3 \-\-program=MAIN_DIALOG
.EE
.SS Capturing widget output
When the dialog closes,
.B gtkdialog3
prints one
.IB VARIABLE = value
assignment per line to standard output, plus an
.B EXIT
variable indicating which button was pressed.
Evaluate the output to import the values into the calling script:
.PP
.EX
I=$IFS; IFS=""
for STATEMENTS in $(gtkdialog3 \-\-program=DIALOG); do
  eval $STATEMENTS
done
IFS=$I

if [ "$EXIT" = "OK" ]; then
  echo "You entered: $ENTRY."
fi
.EE
.SS JSON output
With
.BR \-\-output\-format=json ,
widget values are printed as a JSON object grouped by window name.
The window name is taken from the
.B <variable>
element inside the
.B <window>
tag (or an auto\-generated name if none is specified).
.PP
.EX
gtkdialog3 \-\-program=MAIN_DIALOG \-\-output\-format=json
.EE
.PP
Example output:
.PP
.EX
{
  "widget_contents": {
    "myWindow": {
      "entName": "Alice",
      "chkAgreed": "true"
    }
  },
  "exit": "OK"
}
.EE
.SS XML output
With
.BR \-\-output\-format=xml ,
widget values are printed as an XML document with the same grouping
by window name.
.PP
.EX
gtkdialog3 \-\-program=MAIN_DIALOG \-\-output\-format=xml
.EE
.PP
Example output:
.PP
.EX
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF\-8"?>
<gtkdialog>
  <widget_contents>
    <window name="myWindow">
      <variable name="entName">Alice</variable>
      <variable name="chkAgreed">true</variable>
    </window>
  </widget_contents>
  <exit>OK</exit>
</gtkdialog>
.EE
.SS Standalone file
A file containing only the dialog description can be executed directly
with a shebang line:
.PP
.EX
#!/usr/local/bin/gtkdialog3 \-f
<window>
  <vbox>
    <entry><variable>NAME</variable></entry>
    <button stock="ok"/>
  </vbox>
</window>
.EE
.PP
Or invoked explicitly:
.PP
.EX
gtkdialog3 \-\-file=dialog.xml
.EE
.SS Standard input
Pipe the dialog description via stdin:
.PP
.EX
echo '<window><vbox><button stock="ok"/></vbox></window>' | gtkdialog3 \-s
.EE
.SS Event\-driven program
Execute a script as an event\-driven program:
.PP
.EX
gtkdialog3 \-\-event\-driven=program.sh
.EE
.SS Including function libraries
Source a shell script before executing action commands, making its
functions available to
.B <action>
handlers:
.PP
.EX
gtkdialog3 \-\-include=functions.sh \-\-program=MAIN_DIALOG
.EE
.SS Multiple windows
Define each window in a separate exported variable.
Windows can launch or close each other using function actions:
.PP
.EX
export winMain='
<window>
  <vbox>
    <button><label>Open</label>
      <action function="launch">winSecond</action>
    </button>
  </vbox>
  <variable>winMain</variable>
</window>'

export winSecond='
<window>
  <vbox>
    <text><label>Second window</label></text>
    <button><label>Close</label>
      <action function="closewindow">winSecond</action>
    </button>
  </vbox>
  <variable>winSecond</variable>
</window>'

gtkdialog3 \-\-program=winMain
.EE
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------
.SH LANGUAGE
The dialog description language is an XML\-like markup.
A dialog consists of a
.B <window>
element containing nested containers and widgets.
Each widget may have attribute sub\-elements that control its label,
value, actions, and other properties.
.SS Document structure
.PP
.EX
document     = window ;
window       = "<window" [tagattr] ">" wlist "</window>" ;
wlist        = { container | widget } ;
container    = vbox | hbox | notebook | frame
             | eventbox | expander ;
.EE
.PP
Each container follows the same pattern as
.BR window :
an opening tag with optional inline attributes, a body of nested
containers and widgets, attribute sub\-elements, and a closing tag.
.PP
Any widget or container tag may use XML self\-closing syntax as a
shorthand for an empty element:
.PP
.EX
<hseparator/>           equivalent to <hseparator></hseparator>
<entry visible="false"/>   equivalent to <entry visible="false"></entry>
.EE
.SS Container widgets
.TS
l l.
Tag	Purpose
_
<vbox>	Vertical box layout
<hbox>	Horizontal box layout
<notebook>	Tabbed notebook
<frame title='\fILabel\fR'>	Labeled frame
<eventbox>	Invisible event\-catching container
<buttonbox>	Button container with layout control
<expander>	Collapsible container
.TE
.SS Leaf widgets
.PP
.I Input
.RS
entry, edit, text, tree, chooser
.RE
.PP
.I Buttons
.RS
button, checkbox, radiobutton, togglebutton, switch,
colorbutton, fontbutton
.RE
.PP
.I Predefined stock buttons
.RS
.BR "<button stock='ok'/>" ,
.BR "<button stock='cancel'/>" ,
.BR "<button stock='help'/>" ,
.BR "<button stock='yes'/>" ,
.BR "<button stock='no'/>"
.RE
.PP
.I Selection
.RS
combobox, comboboxtext, comboboxentry, list, table
.RE
.PP
.I Display
.RS
pixmap, progressbar, statusbar, terminal, webview
.RE
.PP
.I Separators and scales
.RS
hseparator, vseparator, hscale, vscale, spinbutton, timer
.RE
.SS Menu widgets
Menus have their own nesting hierarchy:
.PP
.EX
<menubar>
  <menu>
    <menuitem> ... </menuitem>
    <menuitemseparator/>
    <menuitem> ... </menuitem>
  </menu>
</menubar>
.EE
.SS Optional widgets
Some widgets require external libraries and are only available when
.B gtkdialog3
is built with the corresponding library installed.
Use
.B gtkdialog3 \-\-version
to see which optional libraries are enabled.
.PP
.TS
l l l.
Widget	Library	Purpose
_
<terminal>	libvte (VTE 2.91)	Embedded terminal emulator
<webview>	libwebkit2gtk (WebKitGTK)	Embedded HTML/web browser
<sourceview>	libgtksourceview\-4 (GtkSourceView)	Syntax\-highlighting editor
.TE
.PP
The
.B <terminal>
widget embeds a VTE terminal emulator.
It supports
.B <input>
and
.B <input type="file">
to feed commands to the terminal shell,
and tag attributes such as
.BR argv0 ,
.BR text\-foreground\-color ,
and
.BR text\-background\-color .
.PP
The
.B <webview>
widget embeds a WebKitGTK web browser.
Use
.B <default>
to set the initial URL, or
.B <input type="file">
to load content dynamically.
The input file may contain a URL (starting with
.B http://
or
.BR https:// ),
a local file path (starting with
.BR / ),
or raw HTML.
The widget exports its current URI as the variable value.
.PP
.EX
<webview space\-expand="true" space\-fill="true">
  <variable>myWeb</variable>
  <default>https://example.com</default>
</webview>
.EE
.PP
The
.B <sourceview>
widget embeds a GtkSourceView editor with syntax highlighting,
line numbers, and auto\-indentation.
Set the language with the
.B language
tag attribute (e.g.\&
.BR c ,
.BR json ,
.BR sh ,
.BR python ).
Use
.B <input type="file">
to load a source file; a companion
.B .lang
file (containing just the language ID) switches the highlighting
automatically on refresh.
The widget exports its text content as the variable value.
.PP
.TS
l l.
Attribute	Purpose
_
language	Syntax highlighting language (e.g. c, sh, python, json)
font\-name	Font name and size (e.g. "Monospace 12")
show\-line\-numbers	Show line numbers (true/false, default true)
highlight\-current\-line	Highlight current line (true/false, default true)
tab\-width	Tab width in characters (default 4)
.TE
.PP
.EX
<sourceview language="c" font\-name="Monospace 12">
  <variable>editor</variable>
  <input type="file">/path/to/source.c</input>
</sourceview>
.EE
.SS Attribute sub\-elements
Attribute elements appear as children of any widget or container:
.PP
.TS
l l.
Element	Purpose
_
<label>	Display text
<default>	Initial/default value
<variable>	Shell variable name for this widget
<input>	Shell command whose output sets the value
<input type="file">	File whose contents set the value
<output file>	File to write the value to
<action>	Shell command to run on widget events
<item>	List/menu item entry
<sensitive>	Enable/disable state
<width>	Widget width
<height>	Widget height
.TE
.PP
The
.B <input>
element accepts a
.B type
attribute to specify the input kind:
.PP
.TS
l l.
Form	Meaning
_
<input type="bash">cmd</input>	Shell command (same as plain <input>)
<input type="file">path</input>	Read value from file
<input type="stock">gtk\-open</input>	Load GTK stock icon by ID
<input type="icon">name</input>	Load GTK theme icon by name
.TE
.SS Tag attributes
Opening tags may carry inline attributes.
Attribute values can be quoted with either double quotes or single quotes:
.PP
.EX
<window title="My App" width\-request="400">
<window title='My App' width\-request='400'>
<entry visible='false'>
<action signal='clicked' type='shell'>command</action>
.EE
.PP
The general form is:
.PP
.EX
<\fItag\fR \fIkey\fR="\fIvalue\fR" [\fIkey\fR="\fIvalue\fR" ...]>
<\fItag\fR \fIkey\fR='\fIvalue\fR' [\fIkey\fR='\fIvalue\fR' ...]>
<\fItag\fR \fIkey\fR="\fIvalue\fR" ... />    (self\-closing)
.EE
.PP
Single\-quoted attribute values are convenient when the dialog description
is stored in a shell double\-quoted string, avoiding the need to escape
double quotes.
.PP
Any attribute whose name matches a GObject property of the underlying GTK widget
is applied directly.
Boolean properties accept \fBtrue\fR/\fBfalse\fR, integer and float properties
accept numeric values, and enum properties accept the GLib nick string
(e.g.\& \fBstart\fR, \fBcenter\fR, \fBend\fR, \fBfill\fR) or an integer.
.PP
Commonly used GTK widget properties:
.TS
l l l.
Attribute	Type	Purpose
_
halign	enum	Horizontal alignment (fill, start, end, center, baseline)
valign	enum	Vertical alignment (fill, start, end, center, baseline)
hexpand	boolean	Whether the widget requests extra horizontal space
vexpand	boolean	Whether the widget requests extra vertical space
margin\-start	int	Left margin in pixels (LTR)
margin\-end	int	Right margin in pixels (LTR)
margin\-top	int	Top margin in pixels
margin\-bottom	int	Bottom margin in pixels
width\-request	int	Minimum widget width in pixels
height\-request	int	Minimum widget height in pixels
sensitive	boolean	Whether the widget responds to input
visible	boolean	Whether the widget is visible
.TE
.PP
Container\-specific properties:
.TS
l l l.
Attribute	Type	Purpose
_
spacing	int	Pixel gap between children (vbox, hbox)
border\-width	int	Padding inside the container
homogeneous	boolean	Give all children equal size
space\-expand	boolean	Override default expand packing
space\-fill	boolean	Override default fill packing
.TE
.PP
Buttonbox\-specific properties:
.TS
l l l.
Attribute	Type	Purpose
_
layout	string	Button arrangement: spread, edge, start, end (default), center
orientation	string	horizontal (default) or vertical
.TE
.PP
Button\-specific properties:
.TS
l l l.
Attribute	Type	Purpose
_
border\-width	int	Inner padding between button frame and content
spacing	int	Gap between icon and label (default 6)
image\-position	int/string	Icon position: 0/left, 1/right, 2/top, 3/bottom
homogeneous	boolean	Equal space for icon and label
.TE
.SS String escaping
Text content (labels, items, defaults, etc.) can be written as
unquoted or double\-quoted strings.
Angle brackets have special meaning because they delimit tags,
so literal angle brackets in text must be escaped.
.PP
Two escaping methods are available:
.PP
.TS
l l l.
Method	Syntax	Result
_
Double\-quoted	"<button>"	<button>
Backslash\-escaped	\\<button\\>	<button>
.TE
.PP
Inside an unquoted string,
.B \\\\<
prevents
.B <
from being interpreted as a tag opener, and
.B \\\\
followed by any character produces that character literally
.RB ( \\\\\\\\
produces a single backslash).
.PP
Examples:
.PP
.EX
<text><label>\\<button\\></label></text>
<text><label>\\<entry visible="false"\\></label></text>
.EE
.SS Imperative extensions
The language includes simple imperative constructs for dynamic behaviour:
.PP
.TS
l l.
Construct	Purpose
_
<command>	Variable assignment (var := expr)
<if condition="...">	Conditional widget inclusion
<while condition="...">	Repeated widget inclusion
<show/>	Force widget display
.TE
.PP
Expressions in conditions support variables, numbers, and the operators
.BR + ", " \- ", " * ", " / ", " = ", " != .
.SH AUTHORS
Laszlo Pere <pipas@linux.pte.hu>, Thunor <thunorsif@hotmail.com>.
