\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@include version.texi
@c %**start of header
@setfilename gtkdialog.info
@settitle Gtkdialog User's Manual @value{VERSION}
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual documents version @value{VERSION} of the Gtkdialog utility.

Copyright @copyright{} 2003-2007 Laszlo Pere. 

WARNING: This documentation is very incomplete and has not been updated
since at least 2007 although it is still informative for beginners.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts,
and with no Back-Cover Texts.  
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title Gtkdialog User's Manual
@subtitle Incomplete introduction
@c subtitle SUBTITLE-IF-ANY
@c subtitle SECOND-SUBTITLE
@author Laszlo Pere

@c  The following two commands
@c  start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@c Published by ...
@end titlepage
                                                                           
@c So the toc is printed in the right place.
@contents
                                                                           
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Gtkdialog User's Manual
                                                                           
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex
                                                                           
@menu
* Getting Gtkdialog::      How to find, download and install the program.
* Introduction::           A brief description of the package.
* The Description Language::  Syntax of the dialog markup language.
* Invoking the Program::   How to call the program from various languages.
* Widgets::    		   The elements of dialog boxes.
* Containers::		   Dialog elements grouping widgets together.
* Actions::		   What happens when something happens.
@end menu


@node Getting Gtkdialog
@chapter Getting Gtkdialog
@section Download 
The source of Gtkdialog can be downloaded from Anonymous FTP at URL
@uref{ftp://linux.pte.hu/pub/gtkdialog/}.

@section How to Install the Program
The program can be installed using the standard @command{./configure},
@command{make} and @command{make install} command sequence. Further
details can be found in the @file{INSTALL} file included.


@section Copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2003-2007 Laszlo Pere. 

The gtkdialog is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2.0 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.

The program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
License along with this software; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307,
USA.

@node Introduction 
@chapter Introduction
Gtkdialog is a small utility program based on the GTK library. The
program is mainly made for GUI development for shell scripts but can be
used with many other programming languages. The programmer can easily
create a GUI not just for any shell script or UNIX command but for any
interpreted or compiled program capable of starting a child process and
using pipes.

@node The Description Language
@chapter The Description Language

Gtkdialog3 uses an XML-like markup language to describe dialog boxes.
The language looks like XML and follows its basic structure --- tags
with attributes, nested elements, and self-closing tags --- but it is
not standard XML.  The parser recognises a fixed set of tag names
(@pxref{Widgets}, @pxref{Containers}) and has several non-standard
extensions described below.

All of the non-standard language elements listed in this chapter are
@strong{deprecated} and will be removed in a future version.  New
dialog descriptions should use only well-formed XML constructs.

@menu
* Backslash escaping::          Non-standard character escaping
* Space in tag names::          The @code{<input file>} tag name
* Imperative constructs::       Programming constructs in markup
* Implicit window element::    Omitting the root @code{<window>} tag
* Unsupported XML features::   Standard XML features that are not available
@end menu

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Backslash escaping
@section Backslash escaping

Standard XML uses entity references (@code{&lt;}, @code{&gt;},
@code{&amp;}) to represent special characters.  Gtkdialog3 does not
support entity references.  Instead, it uses backslash escaping:

@table @code
@item \<
A literal @code{<} character (prevents it from being parsed as a tag).
@item \>
A literal @code{>} character.
@item \"
A literal double-quote inside a quoted string.
@item \\
A literal backslash.
@end table

@noindent Example --- displaying the text @samp{<button>} as a label:
@example
<text><label>\<button\></label></text>
@end example

In standard XML, this would be written as:
@example
<text><label>&lt;button&gt;</label></text>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Space in tag names
@section Space in tag names

XML tag names cannot contain spaces.  Gtkdialog3 has two tag names
that contain a space:

@table @code
@item <input file>@dots{}</input>
Reads the widget's value from a file.
@item <output file>@dots{}</output>
Writes the widget's value to a file.
@end table

These are parsed as single tokens, not as a tag named @code{input}
with an attribute named @code{file}.  In new code, prefer the
attribute form instead:

@example
@r{Deprecated:}  <input file>/path/to/file</input>
@r{Preferred:}   <input file="/path/to/file">
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Imperative constructs
@section Imperative constructs

The language includes simple imperative programming constructs that
can be placed alongside widget elements.  These are not part of XML
and exist for dynamic dialog generation at parse time.

@table @code
@item <command assignment="@var{var} := @var{expr}">
Assigns a value to a variable.  The expression supports arithmetic
operators (@code{+}, @code{-}, @code{*}, @code{/}) and numeric
constants.

@item <if condition="@var{expr}">@dots{}</if>
Conditionally includes the enclosed widgets.  The condition supports
variable names, numbers, and the comparison operators @code{=} and
@code{!=}.

@item <while condition="@var{expr}">@dots{}</while>
Repeatedly includes the enclosed widgets as long as the condition is
true.

@item <show/>
Forces all widgets created so far to be displayed immediately.
@end table

@noindent Example --- creating five buttons in a loop:
@example
<command assignment="i := 0">
<while condition="i != 5">
    <button><label>Button</label></button>
    <command assignment="i := i + 1">
</while>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Implicit window element
@section Implicit window element

Standard XML requires a single root element.  In gtkdialog3, the
outermost @code{<window>} tag can be omitted; the parser wraps the
content in an implicit window automatically.  This means a dialog
can start directly with a container:

@example
<vbox>
    <text><label>Hello</label></text>
    <button stock="ok"/>
</vbox>
@end example

This is equivalent to:

@example
<window>
    <vbox>
        <text><label>Hello</label></text>
        <button stock="ok"/>
    </vbox>
</window>
@end example

New dialog descriptions should always include an explicit
@code{<window>} element.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Unsupported XML features
@section Unsupported XML features

The following standard XML features are @strong{not supported} by
gtkdialog3's parser:

@itemize @bullet
@item XML declarations (@code{<?xml version="1.0"?>})
@item Document type definitions (@code{<!DOCTYPE @dots{}>})
@item CDATA sections (@code{<![CDATA[@dots{}]]>})
@item Entity references (@code{&amp;}, @code{&lt;}, @code{&gt;},
@code{&quot;}, @code{&apos;})
@item Processing instructions (@code{<?@dots{}?>})
@item XML comments (@code{<!-- @dots{} -->})
@item Namespaces
@end itemize

Including any of these in a dialog description will cause a parse
error.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Invoking the Program
@chapter Invoking the Program

Gtkdialog3 reads a dialog description from one of several sources,
displays the resulting window, and prints the widget values to standard
output when the dialog closes.

@menu
* Command-line options::        All available flags
* Environment variable::        The most common invocation method
* Capturing output::            Reading widget values in a script
* Output formats::              Bash, JSON, and XML output
* Reading from a file::         Loading the dialog from a file
* Standard input::              Piping the dialog via stdin
* Including function libraries:: Sourcing shell functions for actions
* Multiple windows::            Working with more than one window
* Layout options::              Controlling widget packing defaults
* Window placement::            Setting window position and size
@end menu

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Command-line options
@section Command-line options

@table @option
@item -v, --version
Print version information (including which optional libraries are
enabled) and exit.

@item -d, --debug
Debug mode; prints the processed characters as gtkdialog3 parses the
input.

@item -p, --program=@var{VARIABLE}
Read the dialog description from the named environment variable.

@item -f, --file=@var{FILENAME}
Read the dialog description from a file.

@item -s, --stdin
Read the dialog description from standard input.

@item -e, --event-driven=@var{FILENAME}
Execute the file as an event-driven program.

@item -g, --glade-xml=@var{FILENAME}
Read the dialog description from a Glade XML file.  Only available if
gtkdialog3 was built with Glade library support.

@item -i, --include=@var{FILENAME}
Source the given shell script before executing action commands, making
its functions and variables available to @code{<action>} handlers.

@item -w, --no-warning
Suppress warning messages.

@item -G, --geometry=@var{[WxH][+X+Y]}
Set the size and placement of the window.  @var{W} and @var{H} are
the width and height in pixels; @var{X} and @var{Y} are the screen
coordinates.

@item -c, --center
Center the window on the screen.

@item --space-expand=@var{STATE}
Set the default ``expand'' packing for all widgets (@code{true} or
@code{false}).

@item --space-fill=@var{STATE}
Set the default ``fill'' packing for all widgets (@code{true} or
@code{false}).

@item --output-format=@var{FORMAT}
Set the output format: @code{bash} (default), @code{json}, or
@code{xml}.

@item --print-ir
Print the internal representation of the parsed program and exit
without displaying a window.  Useful for debugging the dialog
description.

@item --debug-geometry
Print widget geometry negotiations to stderr, showing preferred and
allocated sizes for each widget.  Can also be enabled by setting the
environment variable @env{GTKDIALOG_DEBUG_GEOMETRY}.
@end table

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Environment variable
@section Reading from an environment variable

The most common way to use gtkdialog3.  Store the dialog description
in a shell variable, export it, and pass its name with
@option{--program}:

@noindent From @file{examples/standard/entry}:
@example
#!/bin/sh

MAIN_DIALOG="
<window title='System Configuration' resizable='false'>
    <vbox spacing='6' border-width='8'>
        <frame title='Hostname'>
            <entry>
                <default>localhost</default>
                <variable>entHostname</variable>
            </entry>
        </frame>
        <buttonbox layout='end'>
            <button stock='cancel'/>
            <button stock='ok'/>
        </buttonbox>
    </vbox>
</window>"
export MAIN_DIALOG

gtkdialog3 --program=MAIN_DIALOG
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Capturing output
@section Capturing widget values

When the dialog closes, gtkdialog3 prints one
@code{@var{VARIABLE}="@var{value}"} assignment per line to standard
output, plus an @code{EXIT} variable indicating which button was
pressed.  Evaluate the output to import the values into the calling
script:

@example
I=$IFS; IFS=""
for STATEMENTS in $(gtkdialog3 --program=DIALOG); do
    eval $STATEMENTS
done
IFS=$I

if [ "$EXIT" = "OK" ]; then
    echo "You entered: $ENTRY."
else
    echo "You pressed Cancel."
fi
@end example

Changing @code{IFS} to the empty string protects spaces in user input
from being split by the shell's word splitting.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Output formats
@section Output formats

By default, gtkdialog3 prints variable assignments in Bash syntax.
Two alternative formats are available via @option{--output-format}:

@subsection JSON output

@example
gtkdialog3 --program=MAIN_DIALOG --output-format=json
@end example

Produces a JSON object grouped by window name:

@example
@{
  "widget_contents": @{
    "myWindow": @{
      "entName": "Alice",
      "chkAgreed": "true"
    @}
  @},
  "exit": "OK"
@}
@end example

The window name is taken from the @code{<variable>} element inside
each @code{<window>} tag (or auto-generated if none is specified).

@subsection XML output

@example
gtkdialog3 --program=MAIN_DIALOG --output-format=xml
@end example

Produces an XML document with the same grouping by window name:

@example
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<gtkdialog>
  <widget_contents>
    <window name="myWindow">
      <variable name="entName">Alice</variable>
      <variable name="chkAgreed">true</variable>
    </window>
  </widget_contents>
  <exit>OK</exit>
</gtkdialog>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Reading from a file
@section Reading from a file

Use @option{--file} to load the dialog description from a file:

@example
gtkdialog3 --file=dialog.xml
@end example

A file containing only the dialog description can also be made
directly executable with a shebang line:

@noindent From
@file{examples/languages/standalone_gtkdialog3_script}:
@example
#! /usr/local/bin/gtkdialog3 -f

<window>
    <vbox>
        <checkbox>
            <label>This is a checkbox...</label>
            <variable>CHECKBOX</variable>
        </checkbox>
        <hbox>
            <button stock="ok"/>
            <button stock="cancel"/>
        </hbox>
    </vbox>
</window>
@end example

When used as a standalone script, widget values are printed to the
standard output of the script as usual.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Standard input
@section Reading from standard input

Use @option{--stdin} to read the dialog description from a pipe:

@example
echo '<window><vbox><button stock="ok"/></vbox></window>' \
    | gtkdialog3 --stdin
@end example

This is useful for generating dialog descriptions dynamically in a
pipeline.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Including function libraries
@section Including function libraries

Use @option{--include} to source a shell script before any action
command runs.  This makes the script's functions and variables
available to @code{<action>} handlers.

@example
gtkdialog3 --include=functions.sh --program=MAIN_DIALOG
@end example

Without @option{--include}, action commands run in a fresh subshell
that only has the exported environment variables.  With it, the
included file is dot-sourced (via @code{. @var{file}}) before each
action command, so unexported shell functions become available.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Multiple windows
@section Multiple windows

Define each window in a separate exported shell variable.  The
variable name must match the @code{<variable>} directive inside the
@code{<window>} element.  Windows can open and close each other using
the @code{launch:} and @code{closewindow:} actions
(@pxref{launch}, @pxref{closewindow}).

@noindent From
@file{examples/languages/bash_script_multi_window}:
@example
winMain='
<window title="winMain" width-request="250">
    <vbox>
        <button>
            <label>Open second window</label>
            <action function="launch">winLaunch1</action>
        </button>
        <button stock="cancel"/>
    </vbox>
    <variable>winMain</variable>
</window>'
export winMain

winLaunch1='
<window title="winLaunch1" width-request="250">
    <vbox>
        <text><label>Second window</label></text>
        <button>
            <label>Close this window</label>
            <action function="closewindow">winLaunch1</action>
        </button>
    </vbox>
    <variable>winLaunch1</variable>
</window>'
export winLaunch1

gtkdialog3 --program=winMain
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Layout options
@section Layout options

The @option{--space-expand} and @option{--space-fill} flags set the
default packing behaviour for all widgets in the dialog.  These
defaults can be overridden per widget using the @code{space-expand}
and @code{space-fill} tag attributes.

@example
gtkdialog3 --space-expand=true --space-fill=true \
    --program=MAIN_DIALOG
@end example

When @code{space-expand} is @code{true}, widgets request extra space
from their parent container.  When @code{space-fill} is @code{true},
widgets fill the extra space they are given.  Setting both to
@code{true} is common for dialogs where widgets should stretch to
fill the window.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Window placement
@section Window placement

Use @option{--center} to center the window on the screen:

@example
gtkdialog3 --center --program=MAIN_DIALOG
@end example

Use @option{--geometry} for precise control over window size and
position.  The format is @code{@var{W}x@var{H}+@var{X}+@var{Y}},
where @var{W}/@var{H} are the width and height in pixels and
@var{X}/@var{Y} are the screen coordinates:

@example
gtkdialog3 --geometry=400x300+100+200 --program=MAIN_DIALOG
@end example


@node Widgets
@chapter Widgets
The dialog description language is a simple XML-like markup capable of
describing complex dialog boxes containing widgets and containers.

Widgets are GUI elements such as buttons, entry fields, lists, and
labels.  Every widget can have attributes, states, and actions
(@pxref{Actions}).  Widgets must be placed inside containers
(@pxref{Containers}).

Most widgets support the following common sub-elements:

@table @code
@item <variable>
Names the shell variable that receives this widget's value on exit.
@item <label>
Sets the display text.
@item <default>
Sets the initial value.
@item <input>
A shell command whose output sets the widget's value.
@item <input file>
A file whose contents set the widget's value.
@item <output file>
A file to write the widget's value to (used with @code{save:}).
@item <action>
A command to run when the widget changes (@pxref{Actions}).
@item <sensitive>
Sets the initial interactive state (@code{enabled} or @code{disabled}).
@item <width>, <height>
Sets the widget's minimum size.
@end table

@menu
* text::                Static text labels
* button::              Pushbuttons
* entry::               Single-line text input
* checkbox::            On/off check marks
* radiobutton::         Mutually exclusive choices
* togglebutton::        Toggle buttons with icon support
* switch::              On/off slide switch
* combobox::            Drop-down selection (editable)
* comboboxtext::        Drop-down selection (fixed choices)
* comboboxentry::       Drop-down with editable entry
* list::                Single-column selection list
* table::               Multi-column sortable table
* tree::                Multi-column tree view
* edit::                Multi-line text editor
* pixmap::              Static image display
* hscale and vscale::   Slider controls
* spinbutton::          Numeric entry with up/down arrows
* colorbutton::         Colour picker button
* fontbutton::          Font picker button
* progressbar::         Progress indicator
* statusbar::           Status message bar
* timer::               Periodic timer
* hseparator and vseparator::  Decorative separator lines
* menubar::             Menu bar with drop-down menus
* terminal::            Embedded terminal emulator
* sourceview::          Syntax-highlighting text editor
* webview::             Embedded web browser
@end menu

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node text
@section @code{<text>} --- Static label

A non-editable text label.  The text can be set with
@code{<label>}, loaded from a file with @code{<input file>}, or
generated by a shell command with @code{<input>}.  Refreshing the
widget re-evaluates its input source, so labels can show dynamic
content.

Exports its displayed text as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/text/text}:
@example
<text>
    <label>This is a label...</label>
</text>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node button
@section @code{<button>} --- Pushbutton

A clickable button.  When clicked, its action chain runs.  If no
action is given, clicking the button exits the dialog and sets
@code{EXIT} to the button's label.

Buttons can display a text label, an icon image, or both.  Use
@code{<label>} for the text and @code{<input file>} for the icon.
If neither is given, the label defaults to @samp{OK}.

Gtkdialog3 searches for icon files in the directories listed in the
@env{GTKDIALOG_PIXMAP_PATH} environment variable if the file cannot
be opened directly.

Tag attributes for button layout:

@table @code
@item image-position
Icon position relative to the label: @code{0} (left), @code{1}
(right), @code{2} (top), @code{3} (bottom).
@item spacing
Gap in pixels between icon and label (default 6).
@item border-width
Inner padding between the button frame and its content.
@end table

@noindent From @file{examples/button/button_action_functions}:
@example
<button>
    <label>exit</label>
    <action>echo You pressed the exit button</action>
    <action function="exit">Exit by button</action>
</button>
@end example

@subsection Pre-defined stock buttons

Gtkdialog3 provides shorthand stock buttons with a built-in label
and icon:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{<button stock="ok"/>}
@item @code{<button stock="cancel"/>}
@item @code{<button stock="help"/>}
@item @code{<button stock="yes"/>}
@item @code{<button stock="no"/>}
@end itemize

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node entry
@section @code{<entry>} --- Single-line text input

A single-line text field for entering strings.  Actions fire when the
user changes the content or presses Enter.

Use @code{<default>} to set the initial text.  The @code{<sensitive>}
sub-element accepts @code{enabled}, @code{disabled}, or
@code{password}.  In password mode the text is hidden with dots.

Exports the current text as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/entry/entry}:
@example
<entry>
    <default>Default entry text</default>
    <variable>ENTRY</variable>
</entry>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node checkbox
@section @code{<checkbox>} --- Check mark

A labelled check box that the user can toggle on and off.  Use
@code{<default>} with @code{true} or @code{false} to set the initial
state.

Actions fire when the state changes.  Conditional actions with
@code{if true} and @code{if false} prefixes let you run different
commands depending on the new state.

Exports @code{true} or @code{false} as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/checkbox/checkbox}:
@example
<checkbox>
    <label>This is a checkbox...</label>
    <variable>CHECKBOX</variable>
    <action>echo Checkbox is $CHECKBOX now.</action>
    <action>if true enable:ENTRY</action>
    <action>if false disable:ENTRY</action>
</checkbox>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node radiobutton
@section @code{<radiobutton>} --- Mutually exclusive choice

A radio button that automatically groups with adjacent radio buttons.
Only one button in a group can be active at a time --- selecting one
deselects the others.

Use @code{<default>} with @code{true} or @code{false} to set the
initial state.  Actions fire on the @code{toggled} signal.

Exports @code{true} or @code{false} as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/radiobutton/radiobutton_attributes}:
@example
<radiobutton active="true">
    <label>First choice</label>
    <variable>RADIOBUTTON1</variable>
    <action>echo RADIOBUTTON1 is $RADIOBUTTON1</action>
</radiobutton>
<radiobutton>
    <label>Second choice</label>
    <variable>RADIOBUTTON2</variable>
    <action>echo RADIOBUTTON2 is $RADIOBUTTON2</action>
</radiobutton>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node togglebutton
@section @code{<togglebutton>} --- Toggle button

A button that stays pressed when clicked and releases on the next
click.  Like regular buttons, toggle buttons can display a label, an
icon, or both.

Use @code{<default>} with @code{true} or @code{false} to set the
initial state.  Actions fire on the @code{toggled} signal.

Exports @code{true} or @code{false} as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/togglebutton/togglebutton_advanced}:
@example
<togglebutton>
    <default>true</default>
    <label>Toggle</label>
    <variable>tgb0</variable>
    <action>save:tgb0</action>
    <output file>/tmp/outputfile</output>
</togglebutton>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node switch
@section @code{<switch>} --- On/off switch

A sliding toggle switch, similar in function to a checkbox but with
a modern visual appearance.  Use @code{<default>} with @code{true} or
@code{false} to set the initial state.  Actions fire when the switch
is toggled.

Exports @code{true} or @code{false} as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/switch/switch}:
@example
<hbox homogeneous="true">
    <text space-expand="true" space-fill="true">
        <label>Enable notifications:</label>
    </text>
    <switch>
        <variable>NOTIFICATIONS</variable>
        <default>true</default>
    </switch>
</hbox>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node combobox
@section @code{<combobox>} --- Editable drop-down

A drop-down list with an editable text field.  Items can be added with
@code{<item>} sub-elements or loaded from a shell command with
@code{<input>}.  The user can select an existing item or type a new
value.

Exports the current text (typed or selected) as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/combobox/combobox}:
@example
<combobox>
    <variable>COMBOBOX</variable>
    <item>First item</item>
    <item>Second item</item>
    <item>Third item</item>
</combobox>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node comboboxtext
@section @code{<comboboxtext>} --- Fixed drop-down

A drop-down list where the user must choose from the available items
(no free-form typing).  Items can come from @code{<item>} elements,
@code{<input>} commands, or @code{<input file>}.  Use @code{<default>}
to pre-select an item by its text.

Exports the selected item text as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/comboboxtext/comboboxtext_advanced}:
@example
<comboboxtext>
    <variable>cboComboBoxText0</variable>
    <item>First choice</item>
    <item>Second choice</item>
    <input>echo "This came from a shell command"</input>
    <action signal="changed">echo "Changed to $cboComboBoxText0"</action>
</comboboxtext>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node comboboxentry
@section @code{<comboboxentry>} --- Drop-down with entry

A drop-down list combined with an editable entry field.  This is a
variant of @code{<comboboxtext>} that additionally allows the user
to type arbitrary text.  It supports the @code{activate} signal, which
fires when the user presses Enter in the entry field.

Exports the current text as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/comboboxentry/comboboxentry_advanced}:
@example
<comboboxentry has-focus="true">
    <variable>cboComboBoxEntry3</variable>
    <default>Type something here...</default>
    <input file>/tmp/inoutfile</input>
    <output file>/tmp/inoutfile</output>
    <action signal="activate">save:cboComboBoxEntry3</action>
    <action signal="activate">refresh:cboComboBoxEntry3</action>
</comboboxentry>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node list
@section @code{<list>} --- Single-column list

A scrollable single-column list.  Items can be added with
@code{<item>} elements or loaded one-per-line from @code{<input>} or
@code{<input file>}.  Use the @code{selected-row} tag attribute to
pre-select a row by index.

Actions fire when the selection changes.

Exports the text of the selected row as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/list/list_attributes}:
@example
<list selected-row="1">
    <variable>LIST</variable>
    <input>printf "First item\nSecond item\nThird item"</input>
    <action>echo "The chosen item is \"$LIST\""</action>
</list>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node table
@section @code{<table>} --- Multi-column table

A sortable multi-column table.  Column headers are defined by a
pipe-separated @code{<label>} and rows by pipe-separated @code{<item>}
elements or pipe-separated lines from @code{<input>} / @code{<input
file>}.  Clicking a column header sorts the table by that column.

Key tag attributes:

@table @code
@item exported-column
Which column's value to export (default 0).
@item selected-row
Pre-select a row by index.
@item selection-mode
@code{single}, @code{multiple}, @code{browse}, or @code{none}.
@item sort-function
Sort type: @code{0} (default), @code{1} (natural), @code{2}
(natural, case-insensitive).
@item column-visible
Pipe-separated @code{true}/@code{false} per column.
@item column-header-active
Pipe-separated @code{true}/@code{false} to enable sorting per column.
@end table

Exports the selected cell text (from the exported column) as the
variable value.  With multiple selection, values are newline-separated.

@noindent From @file{examples/table/table}:
@example
<table exported-column='2' selected-row='1'
    sort-function='1'
    column-header-active='true|true|true|false'>
    <variable>tbl0</variable>
    <label>Column 0  |Column 1  |Column 2  |Column 3</label>
    <input file>/tmp/inputfile</input>
    <item>1002|$RANDOM|0|$RANDOM</item>
    <action>echo "tbl0=$tbl0"</action>
</table>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node tree
@section @code{<tree>} --- Multi-column tree view

A multi-column tree view, similar to @code{<table>} but predating it.
Column headers are defined by a pipe-separated @code{<label>} and rows
by pipe-separated @code{<item>} elements or input sources.

Exports the selected row as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/tree/tree_insert}:
@example
<tree>
    <label>Device    |Directory        |File</label>
    <item>Hard drive |/usr/            |letter.tex</item>
    <item>Hard drive |/etc/            |fstab</item>
    <item>Network    |alpha:/home      |quota.user</item>
    <variable>TREE</variable>
    <action>echo "TREE=$TREE"</action>
</tree>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node edit
@section @code{<edit>} --- Multi-line text editor

A multi-line text editing area with scrollbars.  Use @code{<default>}
to set initial text, or @code{<input file>} to load the contents of
a file.  The @code{save:} action writes the buffer to the file
specified by @code{<output file>}.

Supports clipboard actions: @code{cut:}, @code{copy:}, @code{paste:},
and @code{selectall:} (@pxref{Clipboard actions}).

Exports the full buffer text as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/edit/edit}:
@example
<edit>
    <variable>EDITOR</variable>
    <height>150</height>
    <width>350</width>
    <default>
"This is the default text of the editor."
    </default>
</edit>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node pixmap
@section @code{<pixmap>} --- Static image

Displays a static image.  The image file is specified with
@code{<input file>}.  Gtkdialog3 searches for the file in directories
listed in the @env{GTKDIALOG_PIXMAP_PATH} environment variable if it
cannot be opened directly.

Refreshing the widget reloads the image, which is useful for
displaying dynamically generated graphics.

@noindent From @file{examples/pixmap/pixmap}:
@example
<pixmap>
    <input file>help.png</input>
</pixmap>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node hscale and vscale
@section @code{<hscale>}, @code{<vscale>} --- Sliders

Horizontal and vertical slider controls for selecting a numeric value
within a range.  Use @code{<item>} elements to place custom marks
along the scale.

Key tag attributes:

@table @code
@item range-min
Minimum value (default 0).
@item range-max
Maximum value (default 100).
@item range-step
Step increment (default 1).
@item range-value
Initial value (default 0).
@end table

Actions fire when the value changes.  Exports the current numeric
value as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/hscale/hscale_advanced}:
@example
<hscale width-request="420" range-value="4">
    <variable>hscHScale0</variable>
    <action>echo "hscHScale0 changed to $hscHScale0"</action>
</hscale>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node spinbutton
@section @code{<spinbutton>} --- Numeric spinner

A text entry for numeric values with up/down arrow buttons.  Supports
the same @code{range-min}, @code{range-max}, @code{range-step}, and
@code{range-value} tag attributes as scales.

Actions fire on @code{value-changed} (arrow clicks or typing) and
@code{activate} (pressing Enter).  Exports the current numeric value
as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/spinbutton/spinbutton}:
@example
<spinbutton range-min="-50" range-max="50"
    range-step="5" range-value="10">
    <variable>SPB_RANGE</variable>
</spinbutton>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node colorbutton
@section @code{<colorbutton>} --- Colour picker

A button that displays a colour swatch and opens a colour chooser
dialog when clicked.  Use @code{<default>} to set the initial colour
in @code{#rrggbb} format.  If the @code{use-alpha} tag attribute is
set to @code{true}, an alpha channel is also available and the format
becomes @code{#rrggbb|alpha}.

Actions fire when a new colour is selected.  Exports the colour string
as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/colorbutton/colorbutton_advanced}:
@example
<colorbutton use-alpha="true">
    <default>#4488cc|32768</default>
    <variable>clb3</variable>
    <action>echo clb3 changed to $clb3</action>
</colorbutton>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node fontbutton
@section @code{<fontbutton>} --- Font picker

A button that displays a font name and opens a font chooser dialog
when clicked.  Use @code{<default>} or the @code{font-name} tag
attribute to set the initial font using Pango syntax (e.g.@:
@samp{Sans Bold 12}).

Actions fire when a new font is selected.  Exports the Pango font
description string as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/fontbutton/fontbutton}:
@example
<fontbutton font-name="Monospace 18" use-font="true">
    <variable>ftb1</variable>
    <action>echo ftb1 changed to $ftb1</action>
</fontbutton>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node progressbar
@section @code{<progressbar>} --- Progress indicator

A horizontal progress bar.  The @code{<input>} command runs in a
background thread; each line of output is interpreted as either a
number (0--100, setting the bar position) or text (updating the bar
label).  When the value reaches 100, the action chain fires.

Use @code{<label>} to set the initial bar text.

@noindent From @file{examples/progressbar/progressbar}:
@example
<progressbar>
    <label>Some Text</label>
    <input>for i in $(seq 0 10 100); do
        echo $i; sleep 0.3; done</input>
    <action function="exit">Ready</action>
</progressbar>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node statusbar
@section @code{<statusbar>} --- Status message bar

A message bar typically placed at the bottom of a window.  The
message can be set with @code{<label>}, @code{<default>},
@code{<input>}, or @code{<input file>}.  Refreshing the widget
re-evaluates its input source.

Exports the current message text as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/statusbar/statusbar_advanced}:
@example
<statusbar>
    <default>Ready</default>
    <variable>stb0</variable>
    <input>echo Status from a command</input>
    <output file>/tmp/outputfile</output>
</statusbar>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node timer
@section @code{<timer>} --- Periodic timer

An invisible widget that fires its action chain at regular intervals.
Use it to periodically refresh other widgets or run commands.

Key tag attributes:

@table @code
@item interval
The timer period (default 1).
@item milliseconds
Set to @code{true} for millisecond precision; otherwise the interval
is in seconds.
@end table

The timer runs while it is sensitive.  Disabling the timer stops it;
enabling it restarts it.  Use @code{visible="false"} to hide the
timer's internal label widget.

Exports @code{true} (running) or @code{false} (stopped) as the
variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/timer/timer_advanced}:
@example
<timer milliseconds="true" interval="500"
    visible="false">
    <variable>tmr3</variable>
    <action>refresh:pix30</action>
    <action>refresh:pix31</action>
</timer>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node hseparator and vseparator
@section @code{<hseparator>}, @code{<vseparator>} --- Separators

Purely decorative horizontal or vertical lines used to visually
separate groups of widgets.  They have no value, input, or actions.

@noindent From @file{examples/hseparator/hseparator_advanced}:
@example
<hseparator width-request="400"></hseparator>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node menubar
@section @code{<menubar>} --- Menu bar

A menu bar containing drop-down menus.  Build the menu hierarchy with
@code{<menu>} elements (each containing a @code{<label>} for the menu
title) and @code{<menuitem>} elements inside.  Use
@code{<menuitemseparator/>} to insert separator lines between items.

Menu items support @code{<label>}, @code{<variable>}, and
@code{<action>} sub-elements.  A menuitem with @code{checkbox="true"}
as a tag attribute becomes a check menu item that toggles on click.

@noindent From @file{examples/menubar/menubar}:
@example
<menubar>
    <menu>
        <menuitem>
            <label>Open</label>
        </menuitem>
        <menuitemseparator></menuitemseparator>
        <menuitem>
            <label>Quit</label>
            <action>exit:quit</action>
        </menuitem>
        <label>File</label>
    </menu>
</menubar>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node terminal
@section @code{<terminal>} --- Terminal emulator (optional)

An embedded VTE terminal emulator.  Requires libvte (VTE 2.91) at
build time.  Use @code{gtkdialog3 --version} to check availability.

The terminal spawns a shell process (@code{/bin/sh} by default).
Feed commands to it with @code{<input>} or @code{<input file>}.
Actions fire on the @code{child-exited} signal when the shell exits.

Key tag attributes:

@table @code
@item argv0 @dots{} argv127
Command-line arguments for the spawned process.
@item text-foreground-color, text-background-color
Terminal colours.
@item font-name
Terminal font (Pango syntax).
@end table

Exports the child process PID as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/terminal/terminal}:
@example
<terminal has-focus="true">
    <variable>vte0</variable>
    <action signal="child-exited">clear:vte0</action>
</terminal>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node sourceview
@section @code{<sourceview>} --- Source editor (optional)

A text editor with syntax highlighting, line numbers, and
auto-indentation.  Requires libgtksourceview-4 at build time.

Use @code{<input file>} to load a source file.  A companion
@file{.lang} sidecar file (containing just the language ID) switches
the highlighting language automatically on refresh.

Key tag attributes:

@table @code
@item language
Syntax highlighting language (e.g.@: @code{c}, @code{sh},
@code{python}, @code{json}).
@item font-name
Font name and size (e.g.@: @samp{Monospace 12}).
@item show-line-numbers
Show line numbers (@code{true}/@code{false}, default @code{true}).
@item highlight-current-line
Highlight the current line (@code{true}/@code{false}, default
@code{true}).
@item tab-width
Tab width in characters (default 4).
@end table

Exports the full buffer text as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/standard/sourceview}:
@example
<sourceview language="c" font-name="Monospace 12">
    <variable>srcEditor</variable>
    <input file>/tmp/code.c</input>
</sourceview>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node webview
@section @code{<webview>} --- Web browser (optional)

An embedded web browser using WebKitGTK.  Requires libwebkit2gtk at
build time.

Use @code{<default>} to set the initial URL, or @code{<input file>}
to load content dynamically.  The input file may contain a URL
(starting with @code{http://} or @code{https://}), a local file path
(starting with @code{/}), or raw HTML.

Exports the current URI as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/standard/webview}:
@example
<webview space-expand="true" space-fill="true">
    <variable>webPage</variable>
    <input file>/tmp/nav</input>
</webview>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Containers
@chapter Containers

Containers are layout widgets that hold other widgets and arrange them
on screen.  Every widget must be placed inside a container.

@menu
* vbox and hbox::       Vertical and horizontal box layouts
* frame::               Labelled frame
* notebook::            Tabbed pages
* eventbox::            Invisible event-catching container
* expander::            Collapsible container
* buttonbox::           Button layout container
* window::              Top-level window
@end menu

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node vbox and hbox
@section @code{<vbox>}, @code{<hbox>} --- Box layouts

The most common containers.  A @code{<vbox>} stacks its children
vertically; an @code{<hbox>} arranges them horizontally.  Boxes can
be nested to create complex layouts.

Key tag attributes:

@table @code
@item spacing
Pixel gap between children (default 5).
@item homogeneous
Give all children equal size (@code{true}/@code{false}).
@item space-expand
Default expand packing for children (@code{true}/@code{false}).
@item space-fill
Default fill packing for children (@code{true}/@code{false}).
@item border-width
Padding inside the container.
@end table

@noindent From @file{examples/vbox/vbox}:
@example
<vbox>
    <text><label>First</label></text>
    <text><label>Second</label></text>
    <hbox>
        <button stock="ok"/>
        <button stock="cancel"/>
    </hbox>
</vbox>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node frame
@section @code{<frame>} --- Labelled frame

A container with a visible border and a title label.  Use the
@code{title} tag attribute to set the frame label.  The frame label
can also be set dynamically via @code{<input>} or @code{<input file>}.

@noindent From @file{examples/frame/frame}:
@example
<frame title="Frame1">
    <text><label>Label1</label></text>
    <entry></entry>
</frame>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node notebook
@section @code{<notebook>} --- Tabbed pages

A container with tabbed pages.  Each direct child becomes a page.
Tab labels are set with the @code{labels} tag attribute (pipe-separated),
or auto-generated as @samp{Page 1}, @samp{Page 2}, etc.

Exports the current page index (starting at 0) as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/notebook/notebook}:
@example
<notebook labels="Checkbox|Radiobutton|Tree">
    <vbox>
        <checkbox><label>A checkbox</label></checkbox>
    </vbox>
    <vbox>
        <radiobutton><label>First</label></radiobutton>
        <radiobutton><label>Second</label></radiobutton>
    </vbox>
    <vbox>
        <text><label>Third page</label></text>
    </vbox>
</notebook>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node eventbox
@section @code{<eventbox>} --- Event container

An invisible container that adds mouse and keyboard event handling to
its single child widget.  Useful for detecting clicks, mouse
movement, or key presses on widgets that do not normally emit those
signals.

@noindent From @file{examples/eventbox/eventbox}:
@example
<eventbox above-child="false" visible-window="true">
    <text><label>Click me</label></text>
    <action signal="button-press-event">
        echo "Clicked!"</action>
    <action signal="enter-notify-event">
        echo "Mouse entered"</action>
</eventbox>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node expander
@section @code{<expander>} --- Collapsible container

A container with a clickable header that expands or collapses to
show or hide its children.  Use the @code{expanded} tag attribute
to set the initial state (@code{true} or @code{false}).

Actions fire when the expander is toggled.  Exports @code{true}
(expanded) or @code{false} (collapsed) as the variable value.

@noindent From @file{examples/expander/expander}:
@example
<expander expanded="true">
    <vbox>
        <entry><default>entry</default></entry>
    </vbox>
    <label>Details</label>
    <variable>exp0</variable>
    <action>echo "exp0=$exp0"</action>
</expander>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node buttonbox
@section @code{<buttonbox>} --- Button layout

A container that arranges buttons with consistent spacing.  Use it
instead of @code{<hbox>} for dialog button rows to get standard
platform-appropriate layout.

Key tag attributes:

@table @code
@item layout
Button arrangement: @code{spread}, @code{edge}, @code{start},
@code{end} (default), or @code{center}.
@item orientation
@code{horizontal} (default) or @code{vertical}.
@end table

@noindent From @file{examples/hbox/hbox}:
@example
<buttonbox layout='end'>
    <button stock='cancel'/>
    <button stock='help'/>
</buttonbox>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node window
@section @code{<window>} --- Top-level window

The outermost container.  Every dialog has at least one window.  Use
the @code{title} tag attribute to set the title bar text, and
@code{icon-name} to set the title bar icon.

Multiple windows can be opened using the @code{launch:} action
(@pxref{launch}).

@noindent From @file{examples/window/window_attributes}:
@example
<window title="Example Window"
    icon-name="gtk-dialog-warning">
    <vbox>
        <text><label>Hello, World!</label></text>
        <hbox>
            <button stock="ok"/>
            <button stock="cancel"/>
        </hbox>
    </vbox>
</window>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Actions
@chapter Actions
When the user changes the state of a widget, gtkdialog3 checks whether
actions are attached to it.  If the widget has one or more actions, the
program executes them so the new situation can be handled.

Every widget can have multiple actions.  Gtkdialog3 executes them in
the order they appear in the dialog description, so you can write a
sequence of instructions that runs as a small program.

Actions can be written in two equivalent syntaxes:

@example
@r{Colon syntax:}     <action>@var{type}:@var{argument}</action>
@r{Attribute syntax:} <action function="@var{type}">@var{argument}</action>
@end example

The colon syntax is shorter; the attribute syntax allows additional
attributes such as @code{signal}, @code{condition}, and @code{when}.
Both forms are case-insensitive in the action type.

@menu
* Shell commands::	Running external programs
* exit::		Closing the dialog
* launch::		Opening additional windows
* closewindow::		Closing additional windows
* presentwindow::	Bringing a window to the front
* enable::		Making a widget interactive
* disable::		Greying out a widget
* show::		Making a widget visible
* hide::		Making a widget invisible
* activate::		Simulating a user click
* grabfocus::		Giving keyboard focus to a widget
* refresh::		Reloading a widget's content
* save::		Writing widget data to a file
* fileselect::		Opening a file chooser dialog
* clear::		Clearing a widget's content
* removeselected::	Removing the selected item
* break::		Stopping the action chain
* insert::		Inserting data from one widget into another
* append::		Appending data from one widget to another
* Clipboard actions::	Cut, copy, paste, select all
@end menu

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Shell commands
@section Shell commands

If no action type is given, the action text is executed as a shell
command.  Gtkdialog3 starts the user's @code{$SHELL} (falling back to
@code{/bin/sh}) to run the command.  Before the command runs:

@enumerate
@item
All widget variables are exported as environment variables so the
command can read the current state of the dialog.

@item
If gtkdialog3 was started with the @option{-i @var{file}} option, that
file is sourced by the subshell first, making its functions available
to the command.

@item
The command runs and gtkdialog3 waits for it to finish.  Append
@code{&} to the command to run it in the background without waiting.
@end enumerate

@noindent From @file{examples/button/button_action_functions}:
@example
<button>
    <label>exit</label>
    <action>echo You pressed the exit button</action>
    <action function="exit">Exit by button</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node exit
@section @code{exit:@var{Value}}

Closes the dialog immediately.  All widget variables are printed to
standard output, followed by @code{EXIT="@var{Value}"}.  The calling
script can evaluate this output to find out which button or action
caused the dialog to close.

@noindent From @file{examples/button/button_action_functions}:
@example
<button>
    <label>exit</label>
    <action>echo You pressed the exit button</action>
    <action function="exit">Exit by button</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node launch
@section @code{launch:@var{Name}}

Opens a new window whose definition is stored in the environment
variable @var{Name}.  If a window with that variable name already
exists, it is brought to the front instead of creating a duplicate.
The target window must be defined in a separate exported shell variable
containing a @code{<window>} element.

@noindent From @file{examples/languages/bash_script_multi_window}:
@example
<button>
    <label>launch winLaunch1</label>
    <action function="launch">winLaunch1</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node closewindow
@section @code{closewindow:@var{Name}}

Closes the window identified by @var{Name}.  All variables belonging
to that window are removed.  If other windows remain open, the program
continues running; if this was the last window, the program exits
and prints all remaining variables.

@noindent From @file{examples/languages/bash_script_multi_window}:
@example
<button>
    <label>closewindow winLaunch1</label>
    <action function="closewindow">winLaunch1</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node presentwindow
@section @code{presentwindow:@var{Name}}

Brings the named window to the front and gives it keyboard focus.
Unlike @code{launch:}, this does not create a new window --- it only
raises an existing one.  Useful when you have multiple windows open and
want to direct the user's attention to a specific one.

@noindent From @file{examples/miscellaneous/presentwindow}:
@example
<button>
    <label>presentwindow winLaunch1</label>
    <action function="presentwindow">winLaunch1</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node enable
@section @code{enable:@var{Name}}

Makes the named widget interactive again after it has been disabled.
If the widget is already enabled, nothing happens.  Works on any
widget type.

@noindent From @file{examples/button/button_action_functions}:
@example
<button>
    <label>enable</label>
    <action function="enable">ENTRY</action>
    <action function="enable">CHECKBOX</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node disable
@section @code{disable:@var{Name}}

Greys out the named widget and prevents all user interaction with it.
If the widget is already disabled, nothing happens.  Works on any
widget type.

@noindent From @file{examples/button/button_action_functions}:
@example
<button>
    <label>disable</label>
    <action function="disable">ENTRY</action>
    <action function="disable">CHECKBOX</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node show
@section @code{show:@var{Name}}

Makes the named widget visible.  If the widget is inside a scrolled
container, the container is also shown so the widget actually appears
on screen.

Typically used together with @code{hide:} and conditional prefixes to
toggle parts of the interface:

@noindent From @file{examples/miscellaneous/show_and_hide}:
@example
<togglebutton active="true">
    <label>button</label>
    <action>if true show:btnExample</action>
    <action>if false hide:btnExample</action>
</togglebutton>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node hide
@section @code{hide:@var{Name}}

Makes the named widget invisible.  The widget still exists and keeps
its value, but it is removed from the visible layout.  If the widget
is inside a scrolled container, the container is also hidden.

@noindent From @file{examples/miscellaneous/show_and_hide}:
@example
<menuitem checkbox="true" label="vbox Left">
    <action>if true show:vbxLeft</action>
    <action>if false hide:vbxLeft</action>
</menuitem>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node activate
@section @code{activate:@var{Name}}

Simulates the default activation of the named widget --- clicking a
button, toggling a checkbox, pressing Enter in an entry, and so on.
This triggers the widget's own action chain as if the user had
interacted with it directly.

@noindent From @file{examples/miscellaneous/activate}:
@example
<button>
    <label>Activate everything else</label>
    <action function="activate">button</action>
    <action function="activate">checkbox</action>
    <action function="activate">entry</action>
    <action function="activate">togglebutton</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node grabfocus
@section @code{grabfocus:@var{Name}}

Gives keyboard focus to the named widget.  After this action, keyboard
input goes to the target widget.  Useful for directing the user to a
specific entry field or text editor after an event.

@noindent From @file{examples/miscellaneous/grabfocus}:
@example
<button>
    <label>entry</label>
    <action>grabfocus:entEntry</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node refresh
@section @code{refresh:@var{Name}}

Reloads the content of the named widget from its data source.  If the
widget has an @code{<input>} or @code{<input file>} directive, it is
re-evaluated and the widget is updated with the new data.  All widget
variables are exported before the refresh, so input commands can
access the current state of the dialog.

@noindent From @file{examples/checkbox/checkbox_conditional_refreshing}:
@example
<checkbox sensitive="false">
    <variable>chkCheck</variable>
    <input file>/tmp/inputdir/chkCheck</input>
    <action>refresh:txt0</action>
    <action>refresh:txt1</action>
</checkbox>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node save
@section @code{save:@var{Name}}

Writes the current value of the named widget to the file specified by
its @code{<output file>} attribute.  Works on most widget types
including entries, text editors, checkboxes, comboboxes, scales, and
spinbuttons.

@noindent From @file{examples/edit/edit_actions}:
@example
<button>
    <label>Save</label>
    <action function="save">EDITOR</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node fileselect
@section @code{fileselect:@var{Name}}

Opens a file chooser dialog and places the selected path into the
named widget (typically an entry).  The file chooser's behaviour is
controlled by tag attributes on the target widget:

@table @code
@item fs-action
The type of selection: @code{file}, @code{newfile}, @code{folder}, or
@code{newfolder}.
@item fs-title
The title of the file chooser dialog.
@item fs-folder
The initial directory shown.
@item fs-filters
Pipe-separated file glob patterns, e.g.@: @code{*.txt|*.html}.
@item fs-filters-mime
Pipe-separated MIME types, e.g.@: @code{text/plain|text/html}.
@end table

@noindent From @file{examples/miscellaneous/fileselect_advanced}:
@example
<entry fs-action="file" fs-folder="/usr/share/doc"
    fs-filters="*.txt|*.html"
    fs-title="Select an existing file">
    <variable>ent1</variable>
</entry>
<button>
    <input file stock="gtk-new"></input>
    <action>fileselect:ent1</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node clear
@section @code{clear:@var{Name}}

Removes all content from the named widget.  For text editors and
entries this clears the text; for lists, trees, and tables this removes
all rows; for comboboxes this removes all items.

@noindent From @file{examples/edit/edit_actions}:
@example
<button>
    <label>Clear</label>
    <action function="clear">EDITOR</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node removeselected
@section @code{removeselected:@var{Name}}

Removes the currently selected item from the named widget.  Most
commonly used with list, tree, and table widgets to let the user
delete individual rows.  For text editors, it removes the selected
text range.

@noindent From @file{examples/tree/tree_insert}:
@example
<button>
    <input file stock="gtk-remove"></input>
    <action function="removeselected">TREE</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node break
@section @code{break}

Stops executing the remaining actions in the current action chain.
Actions listed before the @code{break} run normally; actions listed
after it are skipped.  Typically used with a @code{condition} attribute
to conditionally stop the chain.

@noindent From @file{examples/miscellaneous/break}:
@example
<button label="Break">
    <action>echo This action is above the break</action>
    <action condition="active_is_true(CHECKBOX)"
            function="break">""</action>
    <action>echo This action is below the break</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node insert
@section @code{insert:@var{Source},@var{Target}}

Takes the value from the @var{Source} widget and inserts it into the
@var{Target} widget.  For list and tree widgets, a new row is added.
For entry widgets, the text is set.  For edit widgets, the text is
inserted at the cursor position.

@noindent From @file{examples/tree/tree_insert}:
@example
<entry>
    <variable>ENTRY</variable>
</entry>
<button>
    <input file stock="gtk-add"></input>
    <action function="insert">ENTRY,TREE</action>
</button>
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node append
@section @code{append:@var{Source},@var{Target}}

Works the same way as @code{insert:} --- takes the value from
@var{Source} and adds it to @var{Target}.  Both @code{insert:} and
@code{append:} add new rows to list and tree widgets and set text in
entry and edit widgets.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Clipboard actions
@section Clipboard actions

The following four actions operate on text editor (@code{<edit>})
widgets and use the system clipboard.

@subsection @code{cut:@var{Name}}
Cuts the selected text from the named editor to the clipboard.

@subsection @code{copy:@var{Name}}
Copies the selected text from the named editor to the clipboard
without removing it.

@subsection @code{paste:@var{Name}}
Pastes the clipboard contents into the named editor at the cursor
position.

@subsection @code{selectall:@var{Name}}
Selects all text in the named editor.

@noindent From @file{examples/edit/edit_actions}:
@example
<button>
    <label>Select All</label>
    <action function="selectall">EDITOR</action>
</button>
<button>
    <label>Cut</label>
    <action function="cut">EDITOR</action>
</button>
<button>
    <label>Copy</label>
    <action function="copy">EDITOR</action>
</button>
<button>
    <label>Paste</label>
    <action function="paste">EDITOR</action>
</button>
@end example


@bye



